[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> What is really going on when
some meaningful coincidence
occurs in your own life?
How do you recognize the
message of synchronicity?
My guest today will
show you how to watch
for the little hints in
life that are guiding you
to your next step.
He's the author of
"Synchronicity as Spiritual
Guidance" and 16 other
books on spirituality,
and an honored guest
at the Wisdom Network.
Welcome, Dr. Mark Thurston.
Thanks for being with us.
>> Thank you, Carolyn.
Good to be here.
>> So there are a lot of
synchronistic events happening
all the time, and you say there
are ways that we can recognize
those.
There are hints that
are being given.
What are some of those hints
that we can pay attention to
in our own life?
>> Well, some of their hints are
things that happen in our inner
life, our dreams,
our intuitions,
our meditation experiences.
But just as surely,
there are things
that happen in our outer life,
little coincidences, things
that happen that by themselves,
would just be random,
but because they touch
us in a certain way,
it's suggested that it may be
guidance that's flowing to us.
>> I think the word
synchronistic came from--
was it Freud?
>> Well, Carl Jung
coined the term.
>> Yeah, that's right.
>> And he recognized,
as we all do,
that cause and effect is a
spiritual law and a physical
law that shapes our experience.
But he suggested there was
also a complementary law,
the other side of the coin,
and that life is connected,
that there are meaningful
coincidences where things don't
really cause each other,
and yet, we experience them
as being linked in some way.
>> It seems like this is
something that as we move from
maybe a life of
numbness or on the path,
trying to keep up with
day to day activities,
if we back up and really
see that there's some order
in things in our life.
>> And I like to think that
noticing synchronicity is
a matter of developing another
kind of attention that we
typically have in life.
Our lives get so busy.
We rush from one
thing to the next.
And we often don't stop and
pause to listen inwardly
or to really watch outwardly
for these synchronistic events.
>> Give us an idea.
Like, in your own life,
say, today or a typical day,
where you might be paying
attention when maybe 20 years
ago you weren't.
>> Well, let me tell you
one story of a synchronistic
experience that I had.
I had hoped to make
a trip to Europe
to put on some workshops,
but I knew in order
to pull that off I
would need a sponsor.
I especially wanted
to go to Germany,
and I didn't really know who
could do that for me-- help me
with that.
And I was driving home from work
thinking about this problem,
and as I was sitting
at a red light,
I happened to notice the license
plate of the person right
in front of me.
It was a so-called
vanity license
plate, where the person pays a
little extra money every year
and they can have their
license say whatever they want.
And that license plate
in front of me said Rose,
R-O-S-E space M. And I suddenly
remembered that I knew someone,
a friend in Germany, whose
name was Rose Morath,
and it occurred to me she might
be the very person who could
help me put this series
of workshops together.
And in fact, about a year
later, they happened,
and she was the sponsor.
Now, I think Jung
would call that
a synchronistic occurrence.
It wasn't caused-- it
wasn't as if the person who
had that license plate thought
several months earlier,
there's somebody in Germany
named Rose Morath, and surely
several months from
now, a guy named
Mark Thurston's
going to be sitting
behind me at a red
light, and he's
going to need to
think of her name.
That's crazy to imagine
that cause and effect would
have caused this.
>> But how are we more receptive
to these things happening?
You paid attention to that.
>> Well, I think it's a
matter of developing a certain
alertness-- inner
and outer alertness.
I know in my own
life that trying
to keep a regular meditation
time, at least daily,
is important for developing
that kind of sensitivity.
I think watching my
dreams, and sometimes I
think synchronistic things
can come to us via dreams,
but just being attentive to
one's soul life through dreams
can also attune us and
awaken us to that kind
of daytime alertness as well.
Just watching for it,
keeping a journal-- keeping
a spiritual journal of some
sort, what you're recording,
what's happening in your
inner and outer life,
all these are tools that
can make it more frequent.
>> And the journaling, too,
you're actually asking for--
journaling what's
going on in your life.
But perhaps you've got a
question that you are pondering
and you're asking for insight.
That's a time to be
more aware, isn't it?
>> And I advocate working in
a very intentional way with
getting guidance.
>> Like how?
>> Well, let me describe an
eight step sequence that I
encourage people to follow,
and it's part of my book,
"Synchronicity as
Spiritual Guidance."
The steps are pretty
straightforward.
The first is to have a
core value for your life,
or what Edgar Cayce, as
a spiritual philosopher
and spiritual
psychologist, called
setting a spiritual ideal.
But a core value,
what you're going
to put at the heart of your
life, that's the first step.
>> Is that something that
you automatically know?
>> Well, I think
you can intuit it,
but I think it often
involves some self-study--
some self-examination.
For one person, it's
peace, for someone else,
it's love, for someone
else, it's fairness,
for someone else, it's joy.
>> So before we go
to the second one,
how would we find out
what our core value is?
>> Well, I think it's a
matter of asking yourself,
what do I want to have
at the center of my life?
What is the spirit or what
is the value or the quality
that, more than anything
else, I would like to have
guiding and directing me?
>> Does it have to be
somewhat of a spiritual ideal,
a spiritual attribute,
if you will?
>> It could be something
as simple as fairness.
I think for many people,
a core value of fairness
is a good starting point.
And they're not ready to
say Christ, consciousness,
or Buddha.
>> Yeah.
>> But simply being
fair for them--
>> Honest and harmless.
>> All those are possibilities.
>> Yeah.
>> And in this
guidance sequence,
you've got to have that
as the starting point.
Because as potential guidance
comes into your mind,
comes into your
attention, you've
got to have some point of
reference to evaluate it.
>> Would it change?
Would you have a core
ideal today or value
today that in 10 years
would be something else?
>> Definitely.
I think we grow and
develop and we mature
spiritually, emotionally, sure.
>> I can see even having a
core ideal or value today,
and then tomorrow having
something else as well.
>> Well, I would hope one's
core value wouldn't change quite
that often.
I think it finds
ways of being applied
a little bit differently.
If my core value
was love, the way
I express it in my relationship
with my son or daughter
might be a little bit different
than the way I express it
at work with a colleague.
>> Yeah.
>> So we can have ideals and
aspirations that are more
situational.
What I'm advocating is a core
for this spiritual ideal that's
going to be the starting point
for working with guidance.
Then a second step is
to formulate a question.
And you'd be surprised
how often people
don't want to get that
specific about their question.
They just want to say,
well, tell me what to do,
or what should I
do next in my life?
But as we make that
question much more specific,
and even write it
down in a journal
or on a piece of paper,
what is it you want to know?
And actually to write
it out, pen or pencil
on a piece of paper.
>> Why is it that we don't
want to write it out sometimes
and really ask the question?
>> Well, sometimes we
have to confront our fears
or our doubts or our
lack of self-esteem,
or there's probably a
myriad set of reasons.
>> That we might get what
we want, I would think--
>> Or that we don't deserve
what we're seeking for.
Lots of possibilities for why
we avoid that second step.
But let's suppose we
can get a core value,
we can really write out
exactly what our question is.
Then before we start looking
for spiritual guidance,
the next couple of
steps involve working
with our conscious,
rational minds.
So step three is to collect
all the information or pieces
of data we have access to in
the waking, logical, analytical
state.
>> I want to even go
back to the third step.
>> That's the one we're on now.
>> OK.
I guess the second step, then.
What would be a kind of
question that we might ask?
I think it might help
in following along.
What would be something-- if
our core value was love, then
what would be a question that
we might ask in the second step?
>> Well, maybe you have a
question about your career.
>> OK.
>> Should I continue
in my current job?
Or is it time to
retire from that
and start on a second career?
That's a very specific question.
In fact, that one can be
posed in a yes, no answer.
And many people find as they
work with spiritual guidance
in the fifth and sixth
step in this sequence
that if the question has
been worded in a yes, no way,
it's easier for them to discern
the guidance as it comes.
But I've often worked
with open ended questions,
and it can work that way, too.
So with step three,
we're just going
to use our common sense
and our conscious minds.
We collect information, get all
the pieces we can consciously.
And then for step
four, we arrive
at a tentative or
provisional decision.
We're not going
to act on it yet,
but we've said, from the
best I know so far, here's
what my decision would be.
>> What I'm hearing,
too, at this point,
you still have not focused on
any obstacles or any reasons
why I cannot have
what I want in life.
You're really
co-creating, if you will.
You're actually getting
in touch with what it is
that you actually want in life.
>> Now, some of the obstacles
may come up as you think about
what information you
have access to right now.
That third step,
you may recognize,
well, I can't really quit my job
because my paycheck is so good
and I have these
financial commitments.
It would be a real
stretch to think
about starting a second career.
>> Or it may require a
move in order to advance,
or something like that.
>> Or my family members
don't support this.
These could be obstacles
that are pieces of the puzzle
that you consciously
know about already.
>> OK.
>> But again, before you start
looking for the unconscious
to give you guidance or
synchronistic signs all around
you to point the way,
you do this homework.
Now, in step number five, with
a tentative decision already
sitting over here waiting,
you begin to open yourself
to your dreams.
You ask in meditation
for promptings,
you begin to watch for a
little synchronistic events,
like my license
plate, and so forth.
And you try to collect
as much as you can
from these more non-traditional
ways of getting input.
And I always say to people,
use more than one source.
And I even recommend working
with things like the "I
Ching" or astrology,
or tools that
can help us to
elicit or recognize
some of this guidance.
And then we've got to
evaluate the guidance,
and we don't want to become
superstitious about it.
We need to pick and choose
what resonates and feels right
to us.
>> When it feels right to
you, what is the experience?
>> It feels to me as if my
best self is being called
to the surface.
It feels as if
something within me
that knows what I
really ought to be doing
is being reminded
of that knowledge.
>> Isn't there a fraction,
too, the time that there is no
self-doubt in that moment?
Maybe the doubts
may come up later,
but in that moment
of pure knowing--
>> Oh, invariably,
the doubts creep in.
And even at step
number seven, where
you now have formulated
a guided decision
and you measure that against
your ideal, your core value
to make sure it's
pointing you in a way
that you can live with in
keeping with your best self,
there's still obstacles
that creep in,
there's doubts that creep in.
And then step eight
is to act on it.
But even as you're
acting, you've
got to deal with some of these
obstacles you're referring to.
>> I'd love for
you to go through--
in our next segment, to
go through a good example
or an example we
could relate to,
maybe it's the changing
jobs or whatever,
and give us an idea of how
we can go through each step.
And as I'm understanding,
too, it doesn't necessarily
happen in a day or two days.
That you may go--
I know I've done the
40-day journal before.
You may go a period
of time where
you're working on a
particular question
and looking for the
synchronistic events
at the same time.
>> OK.
I'll have an example.
Stay tuned.
I'm talking with Dr.
Mark Thurston, the author
of "Synchronicity as Spiritual
Guidance, All of Life
is Working Together to
Leave You Little Hints."
Stay tuned.
We'll be back in just a moment.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Thanks for joining us.
I'm Carolyn Craft, speaking
with Dr. Mark Thurston.
We were talking about
spiritual guidance.
Now, Mark has written the book,
"Synchronicity as Spiritual
Guidance," and I think
one of the things that
came to mind
earlier was, what do
you say to people who
receive spiritual guidance
or awareness of synchronistic
events from other people?
Is this something that only
we can know the synchronicity
in our own life?
We can't know it for
someone else, can we?
>> Well, I think sometimes
we get messages that are
for our own self--
>> What do we do with that,
and how do we know it has some
value?
>> When you're on
a path yourself,
when you're working on
your own spirituality,
I think that you are open and
receptive to others sometimes
having a piece of
the puzzle for you.
And oftentimes, we
know because it fits.
You ever put together
a jigsaw puzzle
and you find one
that fits because
of the context of the other
pieces arranged around it?
In a similar way, when
you're working on yourself
and you're getting some
of your own pieces,
then when somebody else
has a piece to offer you
and it fits, then it's with a
greater sense of reliability
you can say, boy, thank you,
that was really of help to me
today.
>> It would be
important, I imagine,
to understand our own
intent in sharing that,
as well as perhaps the intent
of someone else and sharing
the information to
really know if it fits.
>> As skillful as I think Edgar
Cayce was for more than 40
years in giving spiritual
advice to others,
it's not surprising
people sometimes ask him,
what should I do if I think I'm
getting guidance for someone
else?
And his answer was, if you
feel like you've gotten a dream
and it's really
about somebody else,
or if you feel like you're
getting a meditation insight
and it's really
for someone else,
you should be willing to
share the information,
but never press the issue.
So if I've had a dream
and I think, maybe
it's really about Carolyn,
be willing to share it,
but do it in a way that
leaves it open for you to say,
well, I'm sure
that's not about me.
Or if I say I've had a
meditation experience where
I heard a little voice that
said something for you,
I would share it in a
way that left you plenty
of outs to say, well,
that's not for me,
that must be your own message.
To never press it.
>> I would think in my own
life, I think that if I do get
something, that I'm really
aware of how this might impact
the other person as well, and
to share it from a harmless
intent.
But if it doesn't feel
like that, to not share it.
You said you had an example
that will help us understand
the eight steps
that you delineate
in your book on synchronicity.
Give us an idea--
>> Well, I'm going to
tell a story on myself.
>> OK.
>> This goes back more
than a couple of decades,
when I was just getting
out of undergraduate school
in the last couple of weeks
of my senior year of college,
and I realized I faced
a very big decision.
What was I going to do next?
And so I went through
those eight steps,
which really come out
of the Cayce material
that I'd been studying
already in college.
And my spiritual ideal at
that time was loving service.
So I wanted to do
something with my life that
would bespeak loving service.
I wrote my question out.
What should I do
next upon graduation?
That's step two.
Step three was to collect
all the information
that I could just at a
commonsense, rational level.
And I began to look for options.
One was to go to
graduate school.
Another was to take a year off
and travel around the country,
and try to find myself,
as people back in that era
used to call it.
And a third was to go get a
job right away, heaven forbid.
But I saw at least
those three options,
and I was looking
into each one of them.
And the only place
that I can think
of where I might be
interested in getting a job
was to move to Virginia
Beach, Virginia
and try to work at the
Edgar Cayce Center.
But I was also considering
a graduate school,
and also this traveling
around a year.
And I finally made
a conscious decision
that I would move
to Virginia Beach,
and see if I could
get a job there.
Then I began to look
for guidance about
whether that would be an
appropriate decision or not.
>> Were you aware of all these
steps that you were doing
during the time?
>> Oh, yes.
>> At that time, you
were aware of exact--
>> I knew about this
eight step procedure,
and I was doing it very
intentionally and consciously.
And I began to ask at the
end of every meditation time
for a prompting or an intuition.
I began to watch my
dreams very carefully.
I began to watch for little
signs of things that happened
and things people said to me.
Now, the most dramatic guidance
was a dream that I had,
and I dreamed just a couple
of weeks into this process
that I was sitting at a
table, just as you and I
are sitting here, and
across the table from me
was Edgar Cayce's grandson,
Charles Thomas Cayce.
And I had met him
at some conferences
when I was a college student.
He was working there
in Virginia Beach,
and he told me in
this dream that he
was getting ready to hire
somebody to work with him.
And in the dream I said, I'm
available, hire me, hire me.
And we talked and we talked,
and the last thing I remembered
him saying when I
woke up from the dream
was he had somebody else in
mind, and I could forget it,
there was no job for me there.
And I woke up from that dream,
and I was very discouraged,
but I remarked to myself
how this process works,
and I wrote the dream down.
And because of
that dream, I began
to set in motion one
of the other options.
Now, eight nights later,
I had a second dream.
I was walking down a
sidewalk in the second dream,
and here came this same
man, Charles Thomas Cayce.
He's still 100 feet away or so
when I hollered to him, hey,
I had a dream about
you the other night.
And as he's approaching
me, he hollers back,
I remember that dream.
And we're beginning to approach
each other, and he says,
but you forgot the
second half of the dream.
Mind you, I'm still
in this dream.
I don't know that I'm dreaming.
And I said, what
part did I forget?
And he said, when I told you
you couldn't have the job,
you didn't like my answer,
and you went and got
a file of everything you had
been doing for the last five
years.
And I looked through that
and I liked it so much,
I changed my mind and I told
you you could have the job.
And I said, that's
great, what is the job?
And he said, in charge of
college age young people
looking for God.
And then I said,
when does it start?
And he said, Christmas
day this year.
Now, mind you, this
dream was in May of 1972,
it's predicting months and
months into the future.
I woke up from the second
dream, wrote that down.
I was very excited.
I had other forms of guidance
as well that I evaluated.
But eventually, I made what
I felt was a guided decision,
took a risk, moved 1,000 miles
to Virginia Beach, got there.
And as you pointed out,
sometimes there's obstacles.
There was no job.
That was all I could do to
keep from going up to see him
in the waking flesh
and blood state
and telling him the
dreams, and saying,
where's the job you promised?
>> Yes.
>> But I didn't do that.
And I hung around for a while
and found some little odds
and ends jobs.
And then somebody
announced he was going off
to graduate school, and
I applied for that job
and I got it.
And it was youth
activities coordinator,
and it began New
Year's Day 1973.
It was within seven days of
what that dream had predicted.
>> Where was the
spiritual guidance?
Where was the synchronicity?
I know in various places,
but how would you say--
what is the difference
between the synchronicity
and the spiritual guidance?
>> Well, synchronicity,
as Carl Jung describes it,
is a law of the universe that
just describes the way in which
things are meaningfully
connected to each other that
couldn't be explained by
physical cause and effect.
And Jung always pointed
out that these outer signs
need to correspond
to inner signs
as well, if it's
truly synchronistic.
Just the coincidence of noticing
that the baseball score today
was 7 to 3, and
then you get home
and you receive something
in the mail that
says you're lucky
number is 73, and then
you are watching channel
73 on television tonight
and something
interesting happens,
it's hard to know
how any of that
corresponds to an
inner soul event.
So in the deepest sense,
that's not synchronistic.
But as I was wrestling with
this deep question of what
am I going to do with my life,
and as I'm having dreams,
or in this case, a series of
dreams that's pointing the way,
and as there were
other signs that
had to do with
things people said
or somebody moving to
Virginia Beach right before me
and saying if you ever
need a place to stay,
even for a month at a time,
my house is open to you,
those other little things
that fell into place to me
were suggestive of this
being the right path for me.
>> So we're following
synchronistic events also.
If we've got a question and
wanting to find the answer,
we pivot towards the
synchronistic events,
paying attention to them
to know our next step.
>> Or you can invite them, you
can make yourself more alert
for them by doing something
like the "I Ching,"
which is a 3,000 year old
Chinese Daoist divination
method, where you
can throw coins--
three coins six
consecutive times,
and you, by the way they
fall heads and tails,
build a hexagram.
And then you look in this book
of wisdom called the "I Ching,"
because there's 64 possible
ways in which those tosses can
turn out.
And in an uncanny,
synchronistic kind
of way, what you read in
the book for the hexagram
you've thrown is often
deeply related to the issue
that you're wrestling with.
>> I've often heard it
said that God doesn't work
in hypothetical situations.
But I'm wondering,
when you're getting
the synchronistic
events and you're
paying attention to
them, that they can also
direct you on the right path.
But could you also see
in synchronistic events
maybe the steps that
you do not need to take?
>> I think you can get
warnings, for sure.
I think you can get
indications that we can learn
from whichever path we take.
In a sense, there's
never a wrong decision,
but that there's
something that can
be learned from any decision.
>> Yeah.
>> But there are some pathways
that are less painful,
more graceful, and they
really optimize our learning.
And I think as we become
alert for these signposts,
we're going to find the more
optimal way to chart our lives.
>> Dr. Mark Thurston, thank
you for being with us today.
Your book, among many others--
is it 16, the total now?
Or we have a--
OK.
"Synchronicity as Spiritual
Guidance, All of Life
is Working Together to
Leave You Little Hints."
Thank you so much for
being with us today.
And thank you for joining
us on a world of wisdom.
I'm Carolyn Craft.
Until next time, stay tuned.
[MUSIC PLAYING]